Light is modulated by rapidly turning the emitter on and off, this causes it to pulse. The resultant pulsed signal is then detected by a 'demodulater', this mechanism is tuned to the specific modulation in order for it to decode it. The detector has to sense multiple 'on' flashes in a row in order for the demodulator to determine it's frequency and decode it.

Strobe light is modulated visible light and is notoriously difficult to look at, because of this visible light is not as popular for modulation as IR light as IR light is not able to be seen by human eyes and as such is able to be used without concern. As such it is used in most hand held remote controls.



Break-Beam Sensors:

Any pair of compatible detectors and emitters can be used in a break beam sensor, here are a few:

- A incandescent flashlight bulb and a photocell

- Red LEDs and a visible light sensor

- IR light emitters and detectors



Shaft Encoders:

Shaft encoders measure the angular rotation of a shaft or axle. They provide velocity/ or position information about the shaft they are attached to. For example a speedometer measures how fast the wheels are turning, and an odometer the number of rotations of a wheel, both of these use shaft encoding as an underlying mechanism.

In order to detect a turn we need to be able to mark that the wheel is turning, by attaching round notched disk to the shaft that clicks a switch each time the shaft completely a full rotation. 

It is more common to use light sensors, by using a emitter on one side of the notched disk and a detector on the other the light from the emitter will only reach the detector when the notched part passes infront of the sensor, allowing the sensor to detect when the shaft has done one full rotation.

If there is only one notch in the disk it may be inaccurate as the sensor may not detect a full rotation due to noise or error, in order to combat this many notches are cut into the disk, as such if there is noise or an error which causes a notch to be missed the effect is negligable.

In order for this type of shaft encoding to work a fast sensor must be used, this is why break beam optosensors are used as resistive light sensors are too slow for them to detect the amount of notches that pass infront of the sensor.

There is an alternative to putting notches in the disk, this is to paint where the notches would be different colours, black (most absorbing) and white (most reflective) are the most effective due to the high constrast to the rest of the disk and their properties in reflecting light. In this case however the light would be reflecting from one side and as such break beam sensors would not be used but instead reflectance sensors, due to the emitter and detector being on the same side of the disk.


No matter the type of sensor used the ouptut is the wave function (a signal of on and off, up and down) of the sensed light intensity of the emitter. This output is processed using signal processing by hardware or just a simple processor in order to determine the position and speed of the shaft by counting the peaks of the waves.

There are two ways to detrmine the speed of a robot:

-Encode and measure the speed of a driven wheel

-Encode and measure the speed of a passive caster that is being dragged by the robot.



The second method (passive caster) can be used for robots use legs for movement, the passive caster can be used to determine how fast the robot moves and the distance travelled.

It is possible to combine the velocity and position information obtained by shaft encoding to have the robot make more sophisticated movements, such as move in an almost perfectly straight line or turn at an exact angle. However due to wheels twisting and sliding there is always error, not to mention often there is backlash in the gearing mechanism, by using shaft encoders it is possible to correct some of these errors however nothing is perfect and as such there will always remain some error.


Being able to detect the direction of rotation is important, if a sudden change in rotation happens it is good if the robot is aware, if the change is purposeful then the encoder can tell the robot how accurate it was, if the change was unintentional then the encoder may be the only way for the robot to know that the shaft accidentally rotated.



The method of detecting and measuring direction of rotation is called 'quadature shaft encoding'. This is similiar to the break beam sensors, however it uses two encoders whose detector inputs are 90 degrees out of phase (one quater of a circle). By comparing the outputs of the two encoders with the output of the previous time step we can tell if there has been a direction change, since they are out of phase only one of them can change it's state (on or off) at a time.

When an encoder turns and the mechanism changes direction a counter is incremented in the encoder, when the shaft turns in the opposite direction the counter is decremented, this keeps track of the overall position of the mechanism.

In robotics quadature shaft encoding is used in arms for complex joints such as the ball and socket. It is also used in 'Cartesian' robots, with these their axis of control are linear and at 90 degrees to eachother.



Resistive position sensors:

These use the change in other physical properties other than light to cause a change in resistance, one example is tension. The resistance in some materials increases as it bends, these passive bend sensors were first used in video game controllers. Bend sensors, due to the repeated bending, wear out much faster than light sensors and as such are less robust.



Potentiometers:

Potentiometers are resistive sensors; once the turning of knobs or pushing a slider increases the resistance. The basic design of a potentiometer consists of a tab that slides across a slot with fixed ends, as the tab is moved the resistance between it and either of the fixed end changes, whereas the resistance between the fixed ends stay the same.

In robotics potentiometers are used to tune/ change the sensitivity of sliding and rotating mechanisms, as well as to change the properties of other sensors, for example a distance sensor on a robot may have a potentiometer that allow the distanc or sensitivity of the sensor manually.


